In this lecture, you'll learn about Basic Connectivity Troubleshooting. So we'll take a look at the
ping and traceroute tools in a bit of depth, and then I'll summarize the Layer 1 and Layer 2 troubleshooting
tools that we covered in earlier lectures. So ping first, ping uses ICMP which like TCP, UDP, IP, etc., makes
up part of the TCP/IP suite. ICMP stands for the Internet Control Message Protocol, and it's used for testing
connectivity.
So when we do a ping, the example you see here on this slide, I'm going to do a ping from R1 to
the 10.1.0.1 IP address on R3. R1 will send out an ICMP echo request
using the exit interface as a source IP and wherever I configured it to send to as the destination IP.
That will get to R3, all being good on the network, and R3 will then send an ICMP echo reply
back to R1. So ping tests two-way connectivity. It tests that the source can get to the destination and also that
the reply can get back from the destination, back to the source again. If the ping is successful on a
a Cisco router, you will see exclamation marks.
So in the example here, we've got one dot indicating the first ping failed and then four exclamation marks,
which says that it succeeded.
This is quite normal.
It's quite normal for the first ping to fail if the router is updating its ARP cache at the time.
So if we've got a success rate of 80%, 4 out of 5 pings are good, that would mean that we do have
connectivity.
If you see 5 dots though, that is bad. That indicates the ping has failed.
So this could be because the router does not have a corresponding route or the destination IP address is
not responding. Less common is, you can see U's, which means that it is unreachable. That happens if
the router discards the packet.
For example, if it's being blocked by an Access Control List (ACL). We'll talk about our Access Control Lists (ACLs),
which are security feature later on. Next thing to tell you about is the 'extended ping' command.
So if you look at the scenario here, and I've put the diagram on the same slide as the text, because I
wanted you to be able to see everything and follow along in the one slide here.
So, hopefully, the diagram is big enough that you can see it.
So our scenario is that a user on PC1 over in the top right here, complains that they can't access
PC3, and you go onto R1 to test this, and you ping PC3 at 10.1.2.10
But what's causing the actual issue is that R4 does not have a route back to PC1 at 10.0.1.10.
But in our scenario, it does have a route back to R1 at 10.0.0.1.
Whenever you do a ping from a router, whenever you send any traffic that originates on the router itself,
it uses the outgoing interface as the source IP address.
So if we go into R1 and ping 10.1.2.10, it will use 10.0.0.1
as the source IP address because that's the IP address on the interface it went out of.
So as long as we've got connectivity from right to left, that will reach PC3. PC3 will send
a reply back,
and because R4 does have a route to the 10.0.0.0 network, the ping will succeed,
and that's going to really confuse you because the user is saying that connectivity isn't working.
So what you need to do is actually send the ping from the same subnet as PC1. So, you can do it from
PC1 itself. But if it's not possible for you to get on PC1, what you need to do is send it
from R1, but from a source address of 10.0.1.1, the same subnet that the user is in.
And the way you do that is with an extended ping.
So the next slide, you'll see when we've got the problem. So the PC1, we do a ping from there and
we can see it's failing because we're getting a timeout.
But then, when we do just a normal ping from R1, it is succeeding because it's coming from the IP
address of the exit interface, which R4 does have a path back to.
So the way that we need to test it and do this in the real world as well, if you're ever doing a ping
from a router because our users complained of connectivity issues, do the ping with the source address
on the same subnet.
So the way that you invoke an extended ping is just enter 'ping' and then hit enter.
It will then go through a wizard that will ask you the options you want to set for the ping.
So, the first thing it asks is, "Do you want to use IP as the protocol?" That's always going to be a yes, so you can
just hit enter to accept the default of IP. You then enter the target IP address. It will then ask you
the repeat count, so you can send more than the default of 5 pings if you want.
This can be useful if you've got, say, an intermittent issue, and you want to just keep sending pings to see
if it's sometimes going up and down.
So in that case, you could set for example, a repeat count of 1000 and it would keep sending 1000 pings before
it stopped.
Datagram size, this is useful to troubleshoot a suspected MTU issue.
If the MTU, the Maximum Transmission Unit, is causing a problem, then you can set the packet to be
different sizes to check that.
You can also set a timeout. We'll normally just leave that at the default of two. And then the one we're interested in here
is we want to set the source address. To get there, you have to say yes, when it asks you, "Do you want to
go into the extended commands?"
So we say, "Yes" there. The first thing that it'll ask is, "What do you want to use as a source address?"
Then we can say the IP address that the actual client is having the problems is in, and then just keep hitting
enter to accept the defaults for everything else. And now, we can see that the ping is failing from
R1 now because the destination does not have a path back to the 10.0.1.1 IP address.
Okay, so that's extended ping. Very useful command as well.
Next up, we have traceroute. Traceroute is very similar to ping, and it's also used for checking connectivity
what traceroute does is it traces the path the traffic is taking when it's going across the network,
and you see here, we've done a traceroute from R1 to R3. It uses ICMP echo request as well.
But the difference between a traceroute and a normal ping is that the traceroute also takes advantage
of the TTL field, which is in the IP header. TTL is Time To Live. The TTL is used as a route loop prevention
mechanism.
Every time that a router passes a packet on from one interface to another, it decrements the TTL by one.
So, say we had a loop between R1 and R2, where R1 was sending traffic to R2, and we had
an issue where R2 thought it sends out traffic back to R1 again.
But what would happen would be the traffic would go from R1 to R2, to R1 to R2, and so on.
It would just keep bouncing back and forth.
And if we were generating more traffic, that would eventually cause so much traffic on the link, it would
congest it, and it would really bring our network down. TTL stops that from happening. Because let's say
that we sent the packet with a TTL of 15, it would get to R2 it would decrement it by 1 to 14 and send
it back to R1. R1 would reduce it to 13 and send it on again.
Eventually, we would get down to 0 and R2 or R1, whichever one it ended up on, would drop
the packet.
When it does drop the packet, it sends and back a time exceeded message to the sender to let it know that
it was dropped because the TTL was exceeded.
So it traced route takes advantage of this.
What traceroute does is it works like a normal ping, but when we send the first ping, it gets sent with
a TTL of 1. So that will reach the first hop, which will then drop it, and then send a time exceeded
reply.
So you see that happening here, we are doing a traceroute from R1 to the 10.1.0.1 interface,
which is on R3, but we send it as a traceroute.
So, it goes out with a TTL of 1. The packet will reach R2 because it's the first hop. R2 will
decrement the TTL by 1, it gets to 0, so it drops it, and it will send a time exceeded message back
to R1.
So R1 learns that R2, its IP address 10.0.0.2, was the first hop. R1 will
then send another packet. This time, with a TTL of 2. So, that will get as far as the second hop.
Our traffic is only going 2 hops in this example,
so that is the final destination.
So R3 will send back an echo reply, and then the traceroute has been completed.
If we were sending something, maybe 10 hops away, then R1 would send the first packet with a TTL
of 1, then a TTL of 2, then a TTL of 3, and so on.
And by doing that, it's able to map out the path that the traffic is taking, hop by hop, all the way across
to the destination. If we have a successful traceroute, the output will look like this.
So here, we did a traceroute to 10.1.2.1.
We see the first hop is 10.0.0.2, the second hop is 10.1.0.1, and then
it got to the destination 10.1.1.1.
Now, if a ping succeeds and a traceroute fails,
don't worry about it.
The traffic is working. Sometimes, the last hop will fail in a traceroute.
Also, sometimes, firewalls will drop traceroute traffic as well.
They will normally do that.
Okay,
this example,
I can see that the packet is getting as far as 10.1.0.1.
It hit the first hop at 10.0.0.2,
then it hit the second hop at 10.1.0.1, and it's failing at that point.
It's not getting to the final destination of 10.1.2.1. So a scenario where this would
happen,
let's say that we ping 10.1.2.1 and the ping fails. The next thing to do is to do a
traceroute to 10.1.2.1 to see how far the packet is getting. If the packet is getting
as far as the router at 10.1.0.1, and then it's failing there, then it's highly likely that the issue
is on that router 10.1.0.1.
So we would then go into the command line on that router, do a 'show ip route' and it's probably missing
the route.
If it's not missing the route in the routing table, it's going to be another issue on that router.
This saves us a a lot of time of going hop by hop, all the way from the source to the destination.
It quickly shows us the most likely place where
the problem is. So, it's a time saving technique. Now, when the traceroute does fail, you can save time, because
what will happen is you'll have to sit there for ages waiting for it to time out. A way that you can
abort and break out of the
the command, is by pressing Ctrl-Shift-6. So hold down the keys, Ctrl-Shift-6, all at the same
time, and that will break you out to the traceroute command.
Okay so that was ping and traceroute.
Some other tools we can use for basic connectivity troubleshooting are tools that we covered earlier
in the Layer 1 and the Layer 2 lectures.
So, I'm just going to recap them for you here.
This is a reminder if you come back to watch this lecture because you do have a troubleshooting connectivity
issue, to list them all in one place.
So, our Layer 1 troubleshooting tools are 'show ip interface brief' and 'show interface'.
I'm not going to cover them again here because you saw them already earlier. Other commands
we can use to troubleshoot Layer 2 issues are 'show arp' and 'show mac address-table' on our switches.
To troubleshoot at Layer 4, we can 'telnet' to the destination IP address and the port number, and that
will tell us if it's answering on that port or not.
And finally, for troubleshooting DNS, we can do an 'nslookup'.
We can also ping by the FQDN to see if a DNS server is able to resolve that name.
Okay,
so that was basic connectivity troubleshooting.
See you in the next lecture.